Add @lit-labs/forms and FormAssociated RFC (#45)
lit/rfcs: rfcs/NNN-form-associated-mixin.md

---
Status: Active
Champions: @justinfagnani
PR: {{ update_with_pr_number }}
---

# Form Associated Mixin

A new labs package with helpers for simplifying the creation of form-associated custom elements.

## Objective

Make it easier to build well-behaved and complete form-associated custom
elements.

### Goals

- Reduced boilerplate needed for an element to participate in an HTML form,
  including:
  - Setting the formAssociated flag
  - Managing the form value and form state
  - Check and update element validity
  - Implementing disable, reset, and restore behavior
- Allow an element to have complete control over its public API.

> - Optionally, allow an element ot opt-in to best-practice public APIs that match

Reviewer: typo: ot -> to

- Setting `static formAssociated = true`
- Attaching `ElementInternals`
- Setting a default ARIA role
- Calling `internals.setFormValue()` when needed
- Calling `internals.setValidity()` and `internals.checkValidity()` when needed
- Handling `formDisabledCallback()`
- Handling `formResetCallback()` and `formStateRestoreCallback()`
- Requesting a reactive update when state held in internals changes.

This boilplate makes it much harder to implement a form-associated element.
Element authors should be able to focus on the actually necessary and unique
parts of their element:

- The element's value and state
- Validation logic

## Detailed Design

A new `@lit-labs/forms` package will contain several utilities:
- A `FormAssociated()` mixin that:
  - Makes an element form associated
  - Implements the standard form associated custom element callbacks
  - Provides a validation hook
  - Adds no public APIs to the element
- A set of decorators for designating fields as the form value and state
  - `@formValue()` for the public form value field
  - `@formState()` for the fields that compose part of the form state

>   - `@formDefaultValue()` for the public form default value field

Reviewer 2: Is lib-labs/form handling whether the form is "touched" in some form? Because native `<input>` elements will have their `value` and `checked` change whenever `defaultValue` and `defaultChecked` are changed as long as the input hasn't been _touched_: https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/input.html#the-input-element:concept-fe-dirty-2

If it's a non-goal then maybe be explicit about it (or is it already and I missed it?)

  - `@formStateSetter()` for private deserializion of the form state
- A `FormControll()` mixin that implements common public APIs for form controls,
  like `.form`, `.disabled`, `.validity`, etc.

### Why a mixin?

`FormAssociated` needs to be a mixin because we need to implement the form
associated callbacks on the element class. Controllers do not work for this use
case.

### Why decorators?

A key choice in this design is to not require or add any _public_ API of the implementing element. Rather than automatically adding `.value` or `.disabled`
fields, we leave that up to the element authors.

In order for the mixin to function, it needs to perform some actions and read
some element state when form-relate state changes. Decorators let us wrap
arbitrary element accessors to invoke the mixin code paths to update form state,
and let us communicate hooks to the mixin declaratively.

```ts
class MyFormElement extends FormAssociated(LitElement) {

  // Setting this field calls internals.setFormValue()
  @formValue()
  @property({reflect: true})
  accessor value: string = '';

  // When the form resets, the value is set to this field
  @formDefaultValue()

>   accessor defaultValue: string = '';

Reviewer: Is this representative of how normal form controls operate? In my (limited) testing, `value` is usually _not_ reflected, and the current value for the `value` attribute is used as default, so I expected:

```ts
  // Setting this field calls internals.setFormValue()
  @formValue()
  @property({reflect: false, attribute: false})
  accessor value: string = '';

  // When the form resets, the value is set to this field
  @formDefaultValue()
  @property({attribute: 'value'})
  accessor defaultValue: string = '';

```

Author: The point here is that you can use the decorators to construct the public API you want, including as you point out, one that matches the oddities of `<input>`. Yes, you do not have to reflect any of these decorated fields.

converter, but we might be able to come up with a way for `@formValue()` to
automatically read the type from the `@property()` property options._

### The FormAssociated mixin

The `FormAssociated()` mixin implements most of the required logic for manging
the form-related state on `ElementInternals`.

#### formAssociated

The `FormAssociated()` mixin defines `static formAssociated = true`

#### ElementInternals

The `FormAssociated()` mixin needs access to `ElementInternals`, so it calls `this.attachInternals()` in the constructor.

Elements applying the mixin may also need access to internals, but
`attachInternals()` is only allowed to be called once so that outside callers
cannot access internals, so a `getInternals()` utility is provided to get them.

To discourage use of `getInternals()` by outside code, it must be called with a
reference to the class and can only be be called once per class.

#### Form Value

A form-associated element's form value must be passed to `internals.setValue()`
whenever the value is changed. This is implemented by the `@formValue()`
decorator, which wrapps an accesor's setter to call `setValue()`.

> A form value must be of type `string | File | FormData | null`. To facilitiate

Reviewer: So I take that you can mimic `<select multiple>` by having a `FormData` value containing multiple values for the same key, right? Is that something to spend a few words on?

Author: Yes, but this sentence is merely reflecting the platform API constraints. This library won't dictate or interfere with how form data is represented, so however you would do this manually is how you would do it here.

value of the control.

Many element might not need to maintain separate form state. The main reason for
using state is to support form _restoring_. Restoring is when a form is changed
to a previous state, such as when using back- and forward- page navigation.

In a form restore callback the value passed may either be the previous form
_state_ or a new form _value_ depending on the mode. Because of this, state and
value should be derivable from each other.

If state is internal to an element, then the element author can designate a
setter and getter as accessors for state derived from value. The getter should
return an object derived from the value and any internal state, the setter
should accept a state and derive and set the value and any internal state.

This is done with the `@formStateGettter()` and `@formStateSetter()` decorators.

Fields that compose part of the internal state should be decorated with the
`@formState()` decorator so that `internals.setValue()` is called when the state
changes.

#### Disabled elements

The `FormAssociated()` mixin implements `formDisabledCallback()` to set the
`ariaDisabled` state and request a reactive update in case the element renders

> differently when disabled.

Author: > Does this do so via `ElementInternals.ariaDisabled`?

Yes

> I know in my tests screen readers still didn't have support for this ~2months ago, but sprouting `aria-disabled` on the host feels equally bad :/
> 
> I'm assuming we could just document this and hopefully it eventually gets fixed, and if needed a consumer could override, call `super.formDisabledCallback()` and then add their own `aria-disabled` attribute if needed.

I think documenting it is good. You could potentially implement a small polyfill that implements `ElementInternals.ariaDisabled` by sprouting an attribute, and remove that over time.

#### Form reset

When a form is reset, form-associated elements should reset their value and
state to _default_ values.

Default values can usually be provided by the element consumer. ie, in a
particular form, one instance of a control might have a default value of `0` and
another instance of that control might have a default value of `100`, all
depending on the form definition.

The `FormAssociated()` mixin implements `formResetCallback()` with logic to
reset the value and state.

The default value and state can be designated by decorators, in one of two ways:

> - Decorators: The `@defaultValue()` and `@defaultState()` decorators let the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Decorators: The `@formDefaultValue()` and `@formDefaultState()` decorators let the
```

#### ElementInternals

The `FormAssociated()` mixin needs access to `ElementInternals`, so it must call
`this.attachInternals()` in the constructor.

Elements applying the `FormAssociated()` mixin and other mixins may also need
access to internals, but `attachInternals()` is only allowed to be called once
so that outside callers cannot access internals.

We could vend a utility to get internals, but all mixins on an element would
have to use that utility, creating either an incompatibility or an ad-hoc
protocol.

In order to be compatible with other code that calls `attachInternals()` a way
that would be allowed locally, we can override `attachInternals()` to allow
just one more call.

<detail>

  <summary>
  
  Example `attachInternals()` override
  
  </summary>

```ts
const FormAssociated = (base) => class extends base {
  #internals = super.attachInternals();
  #attachInternalsCalled = false;

  attachInternals() {
    if (this.#attachInternalsCalled) {
      throw new DOMException(
        `Failed to execute 'attachInternals' on 'HTMLElement': ` +
          `ElementInternals for the specified element was already attached.`,

>         'NotSupportedError');

Reviewer 2: nit: how about just calling `super.attachInternals()` here to let the _native_ implementation throw?
